## 4.2 Downscaling Methods

In principle, each of the bias-correction methods described in Section 4.1 could be used to downscale climate model output to a finer resolution grid using gridded observations. One would simply need to re-grid (interpolate) the model output to the (finer) resolution of the gridded observations, and apply (for example) Quantile Delta Mapping to each grid cell independently. This may be acceptable for some applications, but it can result in distortion of spatial covariance structures (i.e. [Hnilica et. al., 2016](doi.org/10.1002/joc.4890)). For this reason, other methods for gridded statistical downscaling have been developed to correct biases at multiple sites/grid cells and preserve these covariance structures.

### 4.2.1 Analogue Methods
**Constructed Analogues**
Constructed Analogue (CA) based methods produce downscaled data by aggregating observed data from real days which best match a particular simulated day. As described in [Werner and Cannon (2016)](doi.org/10.5194/hess-20-1483-2016), high-resolution observations are coarsened to the model grid, and $N$ (typically $N$ = 30) days with most similar to the given simulated day are selected. Typically anomaly fields (i.e. with the daily or monthly climatology subtracted) are used for each data product, instead of the total fields, to avoid the mean bias of the model influencing the selection of analogue days. The original authors ([Hidalgo et. al., 2008](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=2ccaf3294385bc206b751c466b4d6e2ceecf70af)) measure similarity using RMSE, but other similarity metrics are also supported in `xclim`. The optimal linear combination of these $N$ observed anomaly patterns to reproduce the simulated anomaly pattern is determined using [ridge regression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ridge_regression), and finally the downscaled anomalies are produced using the same linear combination on the high-resolution observed anomaly patterns ([Maurer et. al., 2010](doi.org/10.5194/hess-14-1125-2010)). The literature is unclear regarding best practices for reimposing the climatology onto the downscaled anomalies in the setting of future climate projections, since it mainly focuses on evaluating the skill of this method for the historical period. Regardless, use of stand-alone CA is not reccomended for downscaling future climate projections, so this ambiguity is not consequential for the UTCDW.

**Bias-Corrected Constructed Analogues**
[Maurer et. al. (2010)](doi.org/10.5194/hess-14-1125-2010) proposed an adapted version of CA which corrects biases in the coarse-resolution GCM output using quantile mapping, before selecting the observed analogues. Total fields are compared to observations in the CA step, instead of anomalies, because biases relative to the observed climatology have already been adjusted. When using BCCA for downscaling future projections, the mean climate change signal is removed in the same was as for Detrended Quantile Mapping, and reimposed after the CA step.

[Werner and Cannon (2016)](doi.org/10.5194/hess-20-1483-2016) expand on BCCA with two additional analogue-based methods. Double BCCA (DBCCA) applies a second quantile mapping bias correction after the CA step, to adjust any biases introduced by combining observed days using a linear combination.